ASL Dataset Visualization Module

This folder contains a modular, extensible set of visualization tools for exploring the ASL sign dataset.
Each component is separated into focused files to keep the code clean, testable, and easy to maintain.

The visualizations generated here help analyze the distribution, completeness, and structure of the ASL dataset used for downstream machine-learning tasks.

All generated figures are saved automatically into the ../Figures/ directory (ignored by Git).

Folder Overview
visualization/
│
├── __init__.py
├── config.py
├── categorical.py
├── heatmaps.py
├── missing.py
├── summary.py
└── export.py

What Each File Does
config.py - Global Plot Configuration

Sets the default style for all plots using Matplotlib + Seaborn.
Runs once per session to ensure consistent visualization aesthetics:

DPI settings

Font sizes

Grid visibility

Background colors

categorical.py - Categorical Feature Distributions

Generates count plots for categorical variables such as:

Movement

MajorLocation

MinorLocation

Handshape

Figures dynamically scale in height based on the number of categories, and labels are cleaned for readability.

heatmaps.py - Heatmap Visualizations

This module contains two main heatmaps:

Handshape - Movement Frequency Heatmap
Shows co-occurrence patterns between phonological features.

Numeric Feature Correlation Heatmap
Computes correlations among numeric columns and visualizes them using Seaborn.

missing.py - Missing Data Visualization

Plots the top N columns with the highest proportion of missing values.
Useful for spotting incomplete attributes in the dataset before preprocessing or modeling.

summary.py - Summary Statistics Export

Produces and saves a CSV with summary statistics for all columns in the dataset.
Includes:

Count

Mean / Std (numeric features)

Unique categories

Most frequent value

This file is helpful for documenting dataset shape and variable characteristics.

export.py - Output Directory & File Saving Utilities

Handles:

Creating the Figures/ output directory

Saving Matplotlib figures with consistent formatting

This keeps file I/O separate from visualization logic.

Running All Visualizations

The recommended entry point is the script:

src/visualize_sign_data.py

You can run it from inside the src/ directory:

python visualize_sign_data.py

This script:

Loads the parsed sign dataset

Applies global styling

Runs all visualization modules

Saves all figures into ../Figures/

Exports a summary CSV

Output

All figures and summary files are saved to:

../Figures/


(Automatically created if missing and excluded from Git by .gitignore.)

Extending the Visualization System

To add a new visualization:

Create a new file (e.g., time_series.py)

Implement the plotting logic

Add imports + calls inside visualize_sign_data.py

Use export.save_plot() for consistent saving

This modular architecture allows new graphs to be added cleanly without modifying existing modules.